Summarise your findings here (see specification).

Step 1: Check which mystery board is unsolvable

Using the recursion algorithm as per Q4 on the three mystery
boards, can identify that mystery1.dat and mystery3.dat have valid
solutions whilst mystery2.dat is unsolvable.

Given the recursion algorithm attempts all valid possibilities before
returning a false value, it can be said with confidence that mystery2
is therefore unsolvable.

***

CHECKING DIFFICULTY BETWEEN MYSTERY1 AND MYSTERY3

Note - there is ambiguity as to what "difficult" means in the context
of solving a sudoku puzzle, as different methods of solving a puzzle
will favour different puzzles. It is almost certainly not the case
that a human will attempt to solve a sudoku puzzle using Q4's
recursion algorithm as they are far less suited to computing many
(sometimes hundreds-of-thousands) iterations using a trial-and-error
approach to find a solution.

Developing a complete algorithm that closely mimicks an expert human
sudoku player is beyond the scope of my analysis. Therefore I will
assume that testing the computer's difficulty in solving each puzzle
(using a close variation of the Q4 algorithm) is a proxy for
difficulty and has some correlation with human difficulty but this is
definitely an area of further exploration with more time.

***

Step 2: Check whether mystery1 or mystery3 is more difficult by
counting number of recursion calls required using unchanged Q4
algorithm to solve the board.

mystery1 board: 421,547 recursion calls before solution found
mystery3 board: 14,134 recusion calls before solution found

Just by counting the number of recursion calls using the Q4 algorithm,
we can hypothesise that mystery1 board is more difficult to solve than
mystery3 board.

***

Step 3: Solving for the '1'-'9' bias

The Q4 algorithm has a bias towards solving puzzles
that hit the correct input per cell early into the iteration cycle of
'1'-'9' in numerical order. For example, starting at the top left of
the board (as the algorithm does), if the first empty cell has a
solution of '1', then by chance the algorithm never has to re-iterate
that value and a solution will be found faster than if the solution to
that number had been '9'.

To mitigate this, I have created a new function to solve the board that takes in a 9
argument array of inputs of characters from '1'-'9', and then ran the
algorithm on mystery1 and mystery3 100 times each, randomly shuffling
(using a pseudo-randomiser function which for the purposes of this
task works as needed) the array order each time. I then took an
average of the number of recursions calls needed for each solution for
each puzzle with the results below:

Average recursion calls to solve mystery1: 200,616
Average recursion calls to solve mystery3: 14,757

min-max recursion calls for mystery1: 164 - 437,808
min-max recursion calls for mystery3: 493 - 29,063

The results show that, accounting for any '1'-'9' bias in Q4, mystery1
still remains the more difficult puzzle to solve. Therefore my answer
in response to Q5 is that mystery1 is "extremely hard" and mystery3 is "hard".

Step 4: attempting a simple sudoku puzzle solver using a "unique"
character strategy.

As a last check to see if a simple strategy more in line with a human
approach will bring additional colour to my tests above, I constructed
a sudoku algorithm which goes through the board and inputs in cells where
only one unique character can be placed. Once all possible unique places
are filled in one attempt, one can keep cycling through until either
the whole board is filled or there are no more unique character places
available.

Unfortunately, neither mystery1 nor mystery3 can be solved just using
this method, which means both boards require more complex strategies
to solve. However, I tested the algorithm on easy.dat and medium.dat
and easy.dat was solved in 4 iterations of a full board sweep whilst
medium.dat was solved in 7. Therefore at least from this algorithm we
can conclude that mystery1 and mystery3 are harder than easy.dat and
medium.dat, and deserve their "hard" and "extremely hard" categories
as per Q5.

